New Article: Pitfalls of Safe Rust (#68)
corrode/corrode.github.io: content/blog/pitfalls-of-safe-rust/index.md

Overflow errors can happen pretty easily:

```rust
// DON'T: Use unchecked arithmetic
fn calculate_total(price: u32, quantity: u32) -> u32 {
    price * quantity  // Could overflow!
}
```

If `price` and `quantity` are large enough, the result will overflow.
Rust will panic in debug mode, but in release mode, it will silently wrap around.

To avoid this, use checked arithmetic operations:

```rust
// DO: Use checked arithmetic operations
fn calculate_total(price: u32, quantity: u32) -> Result<u32, ArithmeticError> {
    price.checked_mul(quantity)
        .ok_or(ArithmeticError::Overflow)
}
```

Note that static checks are not removed because they don't compromise on performance of generated code. 
If the compiler is able to detect the problem at compile time, it will do so:

```rust
fn main() {
    let x: u8 = 2;
    let y: u8 = 128;
    let z = x * y;  // Compile-time error!
}
```

The error message will be:

```rust
error: this arithmetic operation will overflow
 --> src/main.rs:4:13
  |
4 |     let z = x * y;  // Compile-time error!
  |             ^^^^^ attempt to compute `2_u8 * 128_u8`, which would overflow
  |
  = note: `#[deny(arithmetic_overflow)]` on by default
```

> For all other cases, use [`checked_add`](https://docs.rs/num/latest/num/trait.CheckedAdd.html), [`checked_sub`](https://docs.rs/num/latest/num/trait.CheckedSub.html), [`checked_mul`](https://docs.rs/num/latest/num/trait.CheckedMul.html), and [`checked_div`](https://docs.rs/num/latest/num/trait.CheckedDiv.html) to avoid overflow.

Reviewer: You might want to also mention the wrapping and saturating methods for completeness

Author: Great idea; added a note!

{% info(title="Quick Tip: Enable Overflow Checks In Release Mode", icon="info") %}

> In general, Rust values performance at least as much as safety.

Reviewer: Not sure I agree with this statement. 

Rust made the decision that integer overflow isn't unsafe. But in other scenarios a performance hit is acceptable to ensure memory safety, if there's no alternative. 

One example would be checked array indexing. Another is when they fixed float casting: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/help-us-benchmark-saturating-float-casts/6231

Author: Great idea. Added a note!

Author: Thanks. I've updated the wording. Can you check again to see if it's okay now?

#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
struct UserCredentials {
    #[serde(default)]  // Ouch, we could deserialize to empty string!
    username: String,
    #[serde(default)]
    password: String,
}

// DO: Implement custom serialization with validation
use serde::{Deserialize, Deserializer};

#[derive(Serialize)]
struct UserCredentials {
    username: Username,
    #[serde(skip_serializing)]  // Never serialize passwords
    password: Password,
}

impl<'de> Deserialize<'de> for UserCredentials {
    fn deserialize<D>(deserializer: D) -> Result<Self, D::Error>
    where
        D: Deserializer<'de>,
    {
        #[derive(Deserialize)]
        struct Raw {
            username: String,
            password: String,
        }

        let raw = Raw::deserialize(deserializer)?;
        
        // Validate during deserialization
        // Throw an error if the username or password is invalid
        let username = Username::new(&raw.username)
            .map_err(serde::de::Error::custom)?;
        let password = Password::new(&raw.password)
            .map_err(serde::de::Error::custom)?;

        Ok(UserCredentials { username, password })
    }
}

> ```

Reviewer: I'm questioning if manually implementing that traits is the best recommendation. Forgoing the derive seems error-prone. 

Furthermore, this issue isn't just with deserialization! I could just create an instance of the struct in code with empty strings and that would be invalid, so it kind of goes back to the earlier point about using types to make invalid things unrepresentable. In that vein, I found this article, which proposes a validation strategy for deserialization. So the idea would be to use a new type like NonemptyString for the fields. https://dev.to/equalma/validate-fields-and-types-in-serde-with-tryfrom-c2n

Author: Oh, I didn't know about that approach! This is amazing. I will replace my recommendation with the suggestion from the article you linked to.

Author: Added. Can you check again?

```rust
// DO: Use atomic operations when possible
fn process_file(path: &Path) -> Result<(), io::Error> {
    let file = fs::OpenOptions::new()
        .read(true)
        .write(true)
        .create_new(true)  // Atomic operation
        .open(path)?;
    // Process file
    Ok(())
}
```

It's a bit more verbose, but it's safer.
I think more Rustaceans should know about this pattern.

## Use Constant-Time Comparison for Sensitive Data

Timing attacks are a nifty way to extract information from your application.
The idea is that the time it takes to compare two values can leak information about them.
For example, the time it takes to compare two strings can reveal how many characters are correct.
Therefore, for production code, be careful with regular equality checks when handling sensitive data like passwords.

```rust
// DON'T: Use regular equality for sensitive comparisons
fn verify_password(stored: &[u8], provided: &[u8]) -> bool {
    stored == provided  // Vulnerable to timing attacks!
}

// DO: Use constant-time comparison
use subtle::{ConstantTimeEq, Choice};

fn verify_password(stored: &[u8], provided: &[u8]) -> bool {

>     if stored.len() != provided.len() {

Reviewer: I don't know much about this area but why check the length first? Isn't that another timing leak that could be used to deduce the length?

Author: Ah, gotcha. My performance optimization backfired! Let me remove that again. Thanks for pointing that out.

{% info(title="Quick Tip: Enable Overflow Checks In Release Mode", icon="info") %}

Rust carefully balances performance and safety.
In scenarios where a performance hit is acceptable, memory safety takes precedence. [^memory_safety]

[^memory_safety]: One example where Rust accepts a performance cost for safety would be checked array indexing, which prevents buffer overflows at runtime. Another is when the Rust maintainers [fixed float casting](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/help-us-benchmark-saturating-float-casts/6231) because the previous implementation could cause undefined behavior when casting certain floating point values to integers.

Integer overflows can lead to unexpected results, but they are not inherently unsafe.
On top of that, overflow checks can be expensive, which is why Rust disables them in release mode. [^overflow]

[^overflow]: According to some benchmarks, overflow checks cost a few percent of performance on typical integer-heavy workloads. See Dan Luu's analysis [here](https://danluu.com/integer-overflow/)

However, you can re-enable them in case your application can trade the last 1%

> of performance for better safety.

Reviewer 2: Mhh. Not sure I would call it "safety", maybe "data integrity"? The problem I have is that a panic at this point can be unsafe too. And it's _very_ hidden. Especially in server code I wouldn't call it "safe".

Author: Good point. How about simply naming what the feature actually does, better overflow detection?

While we're on the topic of integer arithmetic, let's talk about type conversions.
Casting values with `as` is convenient but risky unless you know exactly what you are doing.

```rust
let x: i32 = 42;
let y: i8 = x as i8;  // Can overflow!
```

There are three main ways to convert between numeric types in Rust:

1. ⚠️ Using the `as` keyword: This approach works for both lossless and lossy conversions. In cases where data loss might occur (like converting from `i64` to `i32`), **it will simply truncate the value**. 

2. Using [`From::from()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.From.html): This method only allows **lossless conversions**. For example, you can convert from `i32` to `i64` since all 32-bit integers can fit within 64 bits. However, you cannot convert from `i64` to `i32` using this method since it could potentially lose data.

3. Using [`TryFrom`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.TryFrom.html): This method is similar to `From::from()` but returns a `Result` instead of panicking. This is useful when you want to handle potential data loss gracefully.

{% info(title="Quick Tip: Safe Numeric Conversions", icon="info") %}

> - use `From::from()` when you need to guarantee no data loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- use `From::from()` when you can guarantee no data loss.
```

If I wanna turn my `i64` into a `u8` and "need to guarantee no data loss" I still can't use `From::from()`. When I "need to guarantee no data loss" on `i64` to `u8` then I have to use `TryFrom` and handle the error case well.

- use `TryFrom` when you need to handle potential data loss gracefully.

> - use `as` when you're comfortable with potential truncation or know the values will fit within the target type's range and when performance is absolutely critical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- only use `as` when you're comfortable with potential truncation or know the values will fit within the target type's range and when performance is absolutely critical.
```
Like this? Seems to be somewhat implied by the ⚠️ sign above, but not clearly stated until after this line.

**If in doubt, prefer `From::from()` and `TryFrom` over `as`.**

*Adapted from [StackOverflow answer by delnan](https://stackoverflow.com/a/28280042/270334) and [additional context](https://stackoverflow.com/a/48795524/270334)*

{% end %}

The `as` operator is **not safe for narrowing conversions**
It will silently truncate the value, leading to unexpected results.

What is a narrowing conversion?
It's when you convert a larger type to a smaller type, e.g. `i32` to `i8`.

For example, see how `as` chops off the high bits from our value:

```rust
fn main() {
    let a: u16 = 0x1234;
    let b: u8 = a as u8;
    println!("0x{:04x}, 0x{:02x}", a, b); // 0x1234, 0x34
}
```

So, coming back to our first example above, instead of writing

```rust
let x: i32 = 42;
let y: i8 = x as i8;  // Can overflow!
```

use `TryFrom` instead and handle the error gracefully:

```rust
let y = i8::try_from(x);

match y {
    Ok(value) => println!("It worked: {}", value),
    Err(_) => println!("Oh no, it didn't work!"),

> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
let y = i8::try_from(x).ok_or("Number is too big to be used here")?;
```
More concise and real-world related.

    // without a certificate!
    Ssl { cert_path: String },
}

struct Configuration {
    port: u16,
    host: String,
    // Now we can't have an invalid state!
    // Either we have an SSL connection with a certificate
    // or we don't have SSL at all.
    security: ConnectionSecurity,
}
```

I wrote about an entire blog post on that topic: [Making Invalid States Unrepresentable](/blog/illegal-state/).

## Avoid Primitive Types For Business Logic

It's very tempting to use primitive types for everything.
Especially Rust beginners fall into this trap.

```rust
// DON'T: Use primitive types for IDs
fn get_user(id: u64) {
    // Raw u64 could be any number
}
```

However, do you really accept any number as a valid user ID?
What if 0 is not a valid ID?

You can create a custom type for your domain instead:

```rust
// DO: Create specific ID types
#[derive(Debug, Clone, Copy, PartialEq, Eq, Hash)]
struct UserId(u64);

impl UserId {
    pub fn new(id: u64) -> Result<Self, IdError> {
        if id == 0 {
            return Err(IdError::Invalid);
        }
        Ok(UserId(id))
    }
}

fn get_user(id: UserId) {
    // We know this is always a valid user ID!
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Why should I avoid this? It's not clear to me from just reading this section. I assume you mean this should be encapsulated so we don't have invalid UserIDs by just coming up with numbers, but instead having to use an API that only hands our valid UserIDs which we could then use in other places of that API?

This reads like a very slightly different advice than the previous section, but the difference isn't clearly stated.

Author: I've updated the example. Can you check again?

}

// DO: Protect sensitive data
struct Password(String);

impl std::fmt::Debug for Password {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut std::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> std::fmt::Result {
        f.write_str("[REDACTED]")
    }
}

struct User {
    username: String,
    password: Password,
}
```

For production code, use a crate like [`secrecy`](https://crates.io/crates/secrecy). 

However, it's not black and white either:
If you implement `Debug` manually, you might forget to update the implementation when your struct changes.
A common pattern is to destructure the struct in the `Debug` implementation to catch such errors:

```rust
impl fmt::Debug for Settings {  
   fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> fmt::Result {  
       // Destructure the struct to catch changes
       // This way, the compiler will warn you if you add a new field
       // and forget to update the Debug implementation
       let Settings { version, base_url, content_dir } = self;  
       f.debug_struct("Settings")  
           .field("version", version)
           .field("base_url", &base_url.as_str())
           .field("content_dir", content_dir)
           .finish()  
   }  
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is a bad example in this section. You were just talking about redacting fields, then about potentially forgetting to update the impl on updates to the struct, but then in this example you could just use the derived Debug again.

A better example could be a database connection URI? You usually need passwords for DB access, and you don't want to accidentally leak them.

```rust
struct DatabaseURI {
    scheme: String,
    user: String,
    password: String,
    host: SocketAddr,
    database: String,
}

// don't
impl std::fmt::Debug for DatabaseURI {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut std::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> std::fmt::Result {
        write!(f, "{}://{}:[REDACTED]@{}/{}", self.scheme, self.user, self.host, self.database)
    }
}

// do
impl std::fmt::Debug for DatabaseURI {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut std::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> std::fmt::Result {
        let DatabaseURI = { scheme, user, password: _, host, database } = self;
        write!(f, "{scheme}://{user}:[REDACTED]@{host}/{database}")
        // -- or --
        f.debug_struct("DatabaseURI")  
            .field("scheme", scheme)
            .field("user", user)
            .field("password", &"***")
            .field("host", host)
            .field("database", database)
            .finish()
    }
}
```

Author: Good point!

Thanks to [Wesley Moore (wezm)](https://www.wezm.net) for the hint.

## Careful With Serialization 

> Don't blindly derive `Serialize` and `Deserialize` -- especially for sensitive data. 

Reviewer 2: "Don't blindly" could be remembered as "never". The "careful" from the heading is more appropriate.

Author: I think the wording is clear? 🤔 You could interpret it this way, but it's not implied in the wording.

Reviewer 2: I'm just saying that you want them to take away that they should be careful, and they could understand to never derive those traits.

## Protect Against Time-of-Check to Time-of-Use (TOCTOU)

This is a more advanced topic, but it's important to be aware of it.
TOCTOU is a class of software bugs caused by attackers exploiting the gap between the time a condition is checked and the time it is used. 
Simply put, an attacker could rug-pull the value from under your feet
and you wouldn't notice because it happens exactly between your check and use.

```rust
// DON'T: Check and use in separate operations
fn process_file(path: &Path) -> Result<(), io::Error> {
    if path.exists() {  // Check
        let content = fs::read(path)?;  // Use - file might have changed!
        // Process content
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

Rust supports atomic file operations to prevent this kind of attack.

```rust
// DO: Use atomic operations when possible
fn process_file(path: &Path) -> Result<(), io::Error> {
    let file = fs::OpenOptions::new()
        .read(true)
        .write(true)
        .create_new(true)  // Atomic operation
        .open(path)?;
    // Process file
    Ok(())
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: These examples are so wildly different it's almost comical. In the first you want to read a file that has to exist, in the second you open a file to write regardless of if it exists or not?

And calling them "atomic file operations" is a bit wild to me too. They are not "arbitrary file operations", they are just a few options of [`open()`](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/open.2.html). Every unix hacker / C dev will know them.

The first example is a classic case of "just open the damn file, the OS will tell you if it doesn't exist".

```rust
// do
fn process_file(path: &Path) -> Result<(), io::Error> {
    let content = fs::read(path)?;  // read will fail if the path doesn't exist
    // Process content
    Ok(())
}
```

A _slightly_ better example:
```rust
let config = if config_is_valid(&path) {
    // Attacker could change file contents here!
    load_config(&path)
} else {
    return Err("Config is not valid")
}
```

Author: I've updated it. Can you double-check?

The idea is that the time it takes to compare two values can leak information about them.
For example, the time it takes to compare two strings can reveal how many characters are correct.
Therefore, for production code, be careful with regular equality checks when handling sensitive data like passwords.

```rust
// DON'T: Use regular equality for sensitive comparisons
fn verify_password(stored: &[u8], provided: &[u8]) -> bool {
    stored == provided  // Vulnerable to timing attacks!
}

// DO: Use constant-time comparison
use subtle::{ConstantTimeEq, Choice};

fn verify_password(stored: &[u8], provided: &[u8]) -> bool {
    stored.ct_eq(provided).unwrap_u8() == 1
}
```

## Don't Accept Unbounded Input

Protect Against Denial-of-Service Attacks with Resource Limits.
These happen when you accept unbounded input, e.g. a huge request body
which might not fit into memory.

```rust
// DON'T: Accept unbounded input
fn process_request(data: &[u8]) -> Result<(), Error> {
    let decoded = decode_data(data)?;  // Could be enormous!
    // Process decoded data
    Ok(())
}
```

Instead, set explicit limits for your accepted payloads:

```rust

> const MAX_REQUEST_SIZE: usize = 1024 * 1024;  // 1MB

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const MAX_REQUEST_SIZE: usize = 1024 * 1024;  // 1MiB
```
1MB = 1000 * 1000 :wink:

fn process_request(data: &[u8]) -> Result<(), Error> {
    if data.len() > MAX_REQUEST_SIZE {
        return Err(Error::RequestTooLarge);
    }
    
    let decoded = decode_data(data)?;
    
    // For added safety, you can also check the decoded size 
    if decoded.len() > MAX_REQUEST_SIZE * 2 {  
        return Err(Error::DecodedDataTooLarge);

>     }

Reviewer 2: That's not added safety, that's highly confusing and bad advice. What does the decode do? Does it strictly shorten the data? Can it increase the size? Or is it simply a 1:1 translation?

Just leave it out, but at the very least use a different constant.

Author: Removed that part, thanks.

> The behavior is useful because a caller [...] can choose whether it wants to
> use a relative or absolute path, and the callee can then simply absolutize it by
> adding its own prefix and the absolute path is unaffected which is probably what
> the caller wanted. The callee doesn't have to separately check whether the path
> is absolute or not.

And yet, I still think it's a footgun.
It's easy to overlook this behavior when you use user-provided paths.
Perhaps `join` should return a `Result` instead?
In any case, be aware of this behavior.

## Check For Unsafe Code In Your Dependencies With `cargo-geiger`

So far, we've only covered issues with your own code.
For production code, you also need to check your dependencies.
Especially unsafe code would be a concern.
This can be quite challenging, especially if you have a lot of dependencies.

[cargo-geiger](https://github.com/geiger-rs/cargo-geiger) is a neat tool that checks your dependencies for unsafe code.
It can help you identify potential security risks in your project.

```bash
cargo install cargo-geiger
cargo geiger
```

This will give you a report of how many unsafe functions are in your dependencies.

> If a non-sys level crate has a lot of unsafe code, that could be a red flag.

Reviewer 2: Are crypto crates "non-sys level"? Not quite sure this is good advice. Or even valid in this blanket statement. Maybe ask readers to investigate the use of `unsafe` in that crate and judge if it's necessary or harmful for their application?

Author: True. Removed that sentence.
